# GeLSA: a GPU-accelerated Local Similarity Analysis Tool

Yang Li<sup>1</sup>, Shuaishuai Xu<sup>1</sup>, Yunhui Xiong<sup>1</sup>, Dongmei Ai<sup>3</sup>, Shengwei Hou<sup>2</sup>, Li Charlie Xia<sup>1,*</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Department of Statistics and Financial Mathematics, School of Mathematics, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China  
<sup>2</sup>Department of Ocean Science & Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China  
<sup>3</sup>Department X, Y, Shenzhen 518055, China  

<sup>*</sup>Corresponding author(s).  
E-mail: lcxia@scut.edu.cn (Li C. Xia).

## Abstract

We introduce GeLSA (GPU-accelerated extended Local Similarity Analysis). This novel multi-core accelerated computing tool enables local similarity analysis (LSA) for large-scale time series data in microbiome and environmental sciences. Compared to the previous most efficient LSA implementation (eLSA), GeLSA achieved approximately a 144-fold increase in computational efficiency on GPU machines.This is because GeLSA adapted the max sum subarray dynamical programming algorithm for LSA, allowing efficient core-level parallelisation to use modern CPU/GPU architectures. GeLSA also generally accelerates LSA-derived algorithms, including the local trend analysis (LTA), permutation-based MBBLSA, theory-based DDLSA and STLTA methods.As demonstrated by benchmarks, GeLSA maintained the accuracy of those methods while substantially improving their efficiency. Applied to a 72-hour hourly microbiome series tracking nearly thousands of marine microbes, GeLSA revealed intriguing dynamic co-occurrence networks of phytoplankton, bacteria, and viruses in Shenzhen’s Daya Bay. Overall, GeLSA is a versatile and fast tool for large-scale time series analysis, and we have made it freely available for academic use at http://github.com/labxscut/gelsa. 

**KEYWORDS:** Local similarity analysis; GPU acceleration; Time series; Microbiome; Multi-core parallelisation

## Introduction

Understanding the interactions and impacts among factors on ecological or biological systems is essential in biological and environmental sciences. Sequential measurement, as in time series, is an effective way to capture these interactions over time. Traditionally, interesting interactions were primarily detected by using approaches based on the global correlation of pairwise factors over the entire time interval, such as Pearson or Spearman’s correlation. However, real-world biological or environmental data often exhibit more complex interactive relationships and dynamic changes, including local and time-delayed correlations, as observed in various fields such as microbiology [1-4], molecular biology [5,6], and neuroscience [7,8]. Consequently, methods based on global similarity analysis may fail to detect these nuanced relationships.

To address the limitations of global correlation methods, local similarity analysis (LSA) has been introduced [10-13]. LSA is a local alignment method that identifies the best local alignment configuration between two given time series with a maximum delay restriction, thereby detecting local and potentially delayed correlations. Qian et al. initially proposed the LSA method for gene expression analysis [10], which was later adapted for molecular fingerprint data by Ruan et al. [13] and for metagenomics data by Xia et al. [12]. Due to its easy explainability and high effectiveness, LSA has become widely used and highly cited in many areas and has received significant theoretical and practical improvements.  

Significant methodological improvements in LSA include eLSA, a fast C++ implementation and extension of LSA with replicates of data[12]. Later, statistical theories for LSA p-value approximation [9,11] were developed and added to the eLSA tool. More recent improvements, such as Moving Block Bootstrap LSA (MBBLSA) [17] and Data-Driven LSA (DDLSA) [18], were developed for dependent background null models, which are yet to be included in eLSA. A related method is local trend analysis (LTA) [14-16], identifying such local patterns in direction-of-change series. Significant methodological improvements to LTA include Xia et al.'s theoretical approximation of its statistical significance [16], recently refined by Shan et al. termed Steady-state Theory Local Trend Analysis (STLTA) for dependent null background [19], which is yet to be implemented in eLSA.

Recently, we saw a significant expansion in scale and depth of sequencing-based multi-omics time series. This trend has generated an urgent need for more efficient and scalable LSA tools. Before GeLSA, eLSA was the most efficient LSA implementation, allowing pairwise analysis of hundreds to thousands of factors in one day. Specifically, eLSA reaches its daily analytical limit on a personal computer at roughly a hundred factors when the series is short (<20) and permutation is required, and around two thousand factors when the series is long (≥20) and the theoretically approximated p-values could be used. These factor size limits are now routinely challenged as datasets are collected to assess complex biological and environmental systems with high precision. This necessitates the development of faster and more scalable LSA tools.

To address these challenges, we developed GeLSA, a parallel computing tool designed to accelerate the local similarity analysis of time series data. This method leverages the fast-growing multi-core capacity of modern CPUs and GPUs (Rahman & Sakr, 2021; Palleja et al., 2020; Beyer et al., 2021) to optimise the computation process through redesign and parallelisation of the underlying LSA algorithm, significantly reducing the time complexity of computations. By adapting the max sum subarray asslgorithm to LSA, which allows more efficient core-level computing parallelisation, and taking advantage of multi-core architectures, GeLSA significantly improves the analysis efficiency, achieving approximately 144-fold acceleration On nvidia (RTX2050) compared to eLSA. Specifically, GeLSA can now analyse data series ranging from approximately 1,000 to 10,000 data points daily, depending on the length of the series  by using a commonly available GPU-equipped PC, significantly expanding the analytical capacity for real-world tasks. Moreover, GeLSA integrates and accelerates an expanded set of LSA-derived algorithms, including MBBLSA, DDLSA, and STLTA [17-19], thus generally enabling more efficient time series analysis under autocorrelated and Markovian backgrounds. Overall, it provides researchers with a powerful tool to uncover dynamic interactions in complex biological and environmental systems. 


## Materials and methods

### Simulation Data

To assess the accuracy and efficiency (running time) of GeLSA software in realistic scenarios, we generated two sets of simulated data and conducted comparative analyses against the eLSA tool. In the first dataset, termed simFixLen[m, t], we fixed series length m=100, we randomly sampled (n=\in{20, 40, 60, 80, 100}) pairs of independent and identically distributed standard normal valued all of length m. In the second dataset, called simFixSize[m, t], we fixed pairs number n=200 and randomly sampled pairs of independent and identically distributed standard normal values for each series length m=\in{100, 300, 500, 1000, 1500, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000, 6000, 7000, 8000, 9000, 10000}. We then used these two simulated datasets in both accuracy and efficiency benchmarks.

### 
